Imagine that you are going out
to eat with your friends tonight.
When you get to the restaurant,
you will have to
decide what to order.
You've been there a
few times before and
you always order the same thing.
So you know that
you will be quite
happy if you order it again.
Many of the other items
though look really tasty.
How do you decide when to order
the same good meal again,
or try something new?
By the end of this video,
you will be able to define
the exploration-exploitation
trade-off,
and you'll be able to
define Epsilon-Greedy,
which is a simple method to
balance exploration
and exploitation.
Before discussing the trade-off,
let's first talk about when
we would want to explore,
and when we would
want to exploit.
Exploration allows the agent to
improve his knowledge
about each action.
Hopefully, leading to
long-term benefit.
By improving the accuracy of
the estimated action values,
the agent can make more informed
decisions in the future.
Here's an example of
exploratory behavior.
Let's say each of
these plates represents
a meal at your
favorite restaurant,
and you're trying to choose
which meal to order.
Q of a is the estimated value
for picking that meal.
N of a is the number of times
you have picked that meal,
q star of a is
the value of each meal.
Each time you visit
this restaurant,
you follow a strict regimen and
choose each meal in
a Round Robin fashion.
Perhaps a meal is sometimes
cooked particularly well.
So you are highly
rewarded for ordering it.
After some time, you'll find
the best meal to order.
Exploitation on the other hand,
exploits the agent's current
estimated values.
It chooses the greedy action
to try to get the most reward.
But by being greedy with
respect to estimated values,
may not actually get
the most reward.
Let's look at how
pure greedy action selection
can lead to sub-optimal behavior.
Imagine the agents
likes the first meal.
The agent received
a positive reward
making the value for
that meal higher.
The estimated values for
the other actions are zero.
So the greedy action
is always the same,
to pick the first meal.
This means the agent never saw
any samples for the other meals.
The estimated values for
the other two actions
remain far from the true values,
which means the agent never
discovered the best action.
This naturally introduces
the exploration-exploitation
dilemma.
How do we choose when to explore,
and when to exploit?
When we explore, we get
more accurate estimates
of our values.
When we exploit, we
might get more reward.
We cannot however choose
to do both simultaneously.
One very simple method
for choosing between
exploration and exploitation
is to choose randomly.
We could choose to
exploit most of
the time with a small
chance of exploring.
For instance, we
could roll a dice.
If it lands on one,
then we'll explore.
Otherwise, we'll choose
the greedy action.
We call this method
Epsilon-Greedy.
Where epsilon refers to
the probability of
choosing to explore.
In this case, epsilon will
be equal to one over six.
We can write Epsilon-Greedy
in the following way.
The action that we
select on time-step t,
is the greedy action
with probability
one minus epsilon or
is a random action with
probability epsilon.
We can demonstrate
the effectiveness of
Epsilon-Greedy
action selection on
the 10-arm Testbed
from the textbook.
The 10-arm banner problem
has 10 actions
here shown along the X-axis.
On the Y-axis, we'll show
the distribution of rewards.
Each reward is sampled from
a normal distribution with
some mean q star of
a and variance one.
Each q star of a is drawn from
a normal distribution with
mean zero and variance one.
Each time we run
the 10-arm Testbed q star
will be redrawn from
a normal distribution.
Notice how much randomness
is involved in this experiment.
Q star is randomly sampled
from a normal distribution.
The rewards are randomly
sampled based on q star,
and the actions are randomly
taken on exploration steps.
To fairly compared
different algorithmic choices,
we will need to perform
many independent runs.
Let's take a look
at a single run of
an Epsilon-Greedy agent
in the 10-arm Testbed.
For this agent, we set
epsilon equal to 0.1.
The time-step is on the X-axis.
The Y-axis is the reward
received on that time-step.
Notice how noisy this curve
is with several sharp peaks.
We see a slight upward trend
in the center of these peaks.
But with this amount of noise,
it is hard to make
any conclusions.
If we run another agent with
a different random seed,
we get another noisy curve,
and a third run.
For every time-step, we can
take the average of each
of these three rewards we've
seen on that time-step.
This will produce
a single line that represents
the average reward received
for each of these three runs.
For example, here's
what happens when we
take 20 such runs and
average the reward.
Notice that the spikes on
the curve are much
less pronounced.
If we take 100 runs and
average them together,
we see a much more clear
shape to the curve.
There's a noticeable
increase in reward
in the first 200 steps,
and doing this with 2,000 runs,
we get a clear picture of
the performance of this method.
What this result says is that
this way of behaving obtains
this much reward in
expectation across
possible stochastic outcomes.
Throughout this
specialization, we
used the average performance over
many independent runs to
make scientific comparisons.
Without using summary statistics
like the average,
it will be difficult to make
fair comparisons
between algorithms.
In this example,
the random seed is
the only difference between
runs of this
Epsilon-Greedy agent,
and yet the performance
looks quite different.
Okay, let's go back
to the experiment
on the 10-arm Testbed.
We are going to compare
Epsilon-Greedy agents
with different epsilons.
Let's start by investigating
the average reward obtained
by each algorithm.
The time-step is
shown on the X-axis.
The average reward over
2,000 runs is on the Y-axis.
Here's the performance with
epsilon equal to zero.
When epsilon is zero,
the agent performs
no exploration steps
only greedy steps.
Here's the performance
of epsilon equals 0.01.
Notice that the average reward
keeps improving over time.
This method explores
one percent of the time,
and eventually
converges to take in
the optimal action 99.1
percent of the time.
The agent with epsilon
equal to 0.1 obtains
more reward earlier on average
than the other methods.
But it plateaus after 300 steps.
In this lecture, we
discussed the trade-off
between exploration
and exploitation.
We also discussed Epsilon-Greedy,
which is a simple method for
balancing exploration
and exploitation.
Later, we will discuss
more sophisticated methods
for choosing between
exploration and exploitation.